[Music]
so in the previous lecture
we are looking at some of the graph
based data structures
that can be used
to
solve
the global routing problem now in this
lecture in the present lecture we shall
looking at some other approaches
ah namely means
bottom up and
top down hierarchical approaches and
also some approaches which are based on
means optimizing ah some kind of an
objective or cost function we shall be
looking at
some of those approaches which are used
in practice ok
so broadly speaking
this already we have discussed earlier
in detail
global routing
what does a global router do
it
tries
to
manage the whole routing problem using
divide and conquer kind of an approach
it tries to decompose a large routing
problem into smaller sub problems
which can be solved or handled one at a
time
so global
router takes the whole routing problem
in its entirety
and it
breaks it up into smaller sub problems
which are then fed to the detailed
router one sub problem at a time for
example a channel routing sub problem ok
so
the channel router will look at only
that smaller sub problem and there are
very good algorithms available for
channel routing it tries to solve it and
then it moves to the next one
so
this makes sense because instead of
considering the whole global problem
where there can be thousands and
thousands of nets and so large areas so
many blocks so it would be extremely
complex to handle ok
fine
so as
i had shown using an example in the last
lecture
this can be
done
by
determining rough
paths
for each net that needs to be connected
which actually means
the sequence of the channels or the sub
regions
it needs to
go through
fine
now let us
come to
a
discussion on
how we can
go for global routing in scenarios where
our floor plan is given or when our
placement is given ok suppose my floor
plan is given there are some design
styles as i said where floor planning
and placement does not make much
difference
so let us say i have a placement graph
available with me or ah let us say to
start with a floor plan graph from the
floor plan graph how i can
handle the global routing problem
so
let us take an example for this case i
shall show it
so i am showing the dual graph of the
float plane like this
lets say
so here i have a floor plan
where
there are six blocks which are placed
and superimposed on the floor plan i am
showing the dual graph
so you recall the definition of a dual
graph
each rectangular region corresponds to a
vertex
there will be an edge between two vertex
if there is a common boundary
between the regions
between five and one there is a common
boundary five and six there is a common
boundary and so on ok
fine
so
this dual graph can be used for global
routing the idea is as
follows for every
for every edge you can define a weight
that represents the capacity of the
boundary
like
you see
if the blocks are of shape like this
this is a quite long boundary which
means number of connections are possible
between these two
so i can have a
higher weight for this edge
similarly between one and five
the the width of this boundary is quite
narrow so i will have a smaller weight
for this boundary
so the weight
of this graph will give you
the capacity of the corresponding
channel or the boundary
and of course the edge length will be
represented
by
this l i j
so both of these are important ok now
when i talk about global routing
so we have two terminals located in two
different blocks
so we have to find out a path connecting
them
like you see
in this graph suppose i have a pin
located in block five
i have to connect it
to a pin which is located in block three
now
this graph will be having some weights
in each of the edges
now higher weight means
that is a more preferable path to follow
because
that boundary has higher capacity
so we are trying to find out a
path which has the maximum weight
there are many graph algorithms which
are existing for that maximizing
the path weight
so
for example for this problem maybe you
see that your
pathway will be this
this will be your
best path five to four four to three
so once you have it then you have a
global problem global routing problem
defined
for interconnection you have to first go
through this channel let us call this c
one then you have to go through this
channel call it c two and here
so here every edge essentially indicates
a channel
ok
so a path between two vertices it is
essentially indicates a sequence of
channel it is
going or passing through
so if you have the dual graph
corresponding to floor plan
then
directly the path will give you the
sequence of channels
that you are
traversing in order to
get the corresponding path
ok
now suppose
i mean we have the placement given to us
so when we have the placement given to
us then the routing region space is
already defined
this is like the channel intersection
graph ok
so
this is quite similar to the channel
intersection graph which i have already
said so we can use this so
if we have the placement given to us but
not the
if we have the floor plan given
but not the placement then you can use
this approach
but if you have the placement given
then you have a routing graph which is
nothing but the channel intersection
graph that we have discussed
where the vertices will represent
regions which will correspond to channel
edges represent adjacency between chain
or the dual of this either way
the dual graph is the channel
intersection graph
ok
now you can follow a sequential approach
like this
given a set of nets
i will assume that the nets are all two
terminal in nature
in every net you are trying to connect
two points right
two points you want to connect that is a
net
so you can order the nets
and handle them sequentially one at a
time the ordering can be based on a
number of heuristics like
number of terminals
so a net which contains largest number
of terminals can be given higher
priority
ok
bounding box length
the nets which are farthest away from
each other that i mean the net switch
connect points
which are farthest from each other that
can also be given
priority and criticality
some nets which are already identified
as critical
by the user
can be given higher priority for
interconnection
so you see there are
three things
nets that connect more than two points
larger number of points can be given
priority nets which connect
points which at longer distances from
each other that can be given priority
or
the nets which the user has mentioned or
specified as critical
which would determine the overall
performance of the system that can also
be given priority so that the best path
can be found for them
for the others maybe you will be
founding a roundabout path not so good
ok that can be acceptable
so the sequential approaches ah
use typically variations of mesh running
or line search methods
and there is another see you see
means i will just mention this
there is a very
commonly used
method for rip up and reroute
if something goes wrong
you see
now what will happen
typically this situation is like that
say you take a routing problem
try to solve it using the methods that
we have discussed global routing
followed by detailed routing
at the end you may find
that there are some nets set up nets
which you are still not able to route
so for those
as the last resort you can use the maze
or area routing algorithm to find the
path if
from anywhere it is existing
because when you are using
or into the detailed routing phase you
are only considering one channel at a
time
you are not looking at the global
scenario anymore but if you see that
there are two points which are still to
be connected you first try
any of the maze routing algorithm to see
that whether you are able to find a path
if so fine
otherwise
people typically use
well it is a last resort it is called
rip up and read out rip up means you see
many of the routing decisions that you
take
are based on some heuristics which means
if you run it again maybe you will be
getting a different solution
rip up means some regions
where you find that there is some
congestion you withdraw
means all the nets which have been
routed and again redo it
maybe the next time you do it you will
be coming up with a better solution
ah will be coming with a different
solution which can be better
which may be accommodate we may be able
to accommodate this new connection as
well
so rip up and heuristic works
pretty well typically and and it is a
favorite for many designers when they
are into the last phases of the physical
design ok
fine
well of course you can
go for the hierarchical approaches
so here what you do
here we use the hierarchy of the routing
graph
so again this is a divide and conquer
kind of an approach
we decompose a large routing problem
into smaller sub problems
which can be solved independently
and once you solve these smaller sub
problems independently
you will have to combine them together
again
so you combine them together to get the
overall solution
right
so i shall show an example
so you you define something like a cut
tree which is quite similar to the
tree
ah that were discussed when we were
talking about the partitioning problem
that we define some kind of a
partitioning tree and you can cut it get
some partition something similar to that
so the cut tree is defined in such a way
that every interior node of the country
represents a global routing problem
and
and each of these global routing problem
can be solved independently
now this
smaller nodes indicate global routing
problem which is smaller in size
you see we shall see later that how the
routing problem can be translated into
an integer programming problem
see integer programming problem
the advantage is that you are mapping it
into an optimization problem
which you are solving using some
available tool solver tool
now the advantage is that once you get a
solution
you are guaranteed to get the best
but the problem is that you cannot use
it to solve large problem instances you
can use it only for smaller sub problems
so that when you are using a divide and
conquer kind of an approach it means
it actually makes sense whenever smaller
sub problem you can use integer
programming to solve it optimally and
when you have many such sub problems
which are solved you combine them
together to get the solution of the
total problem ok
fine
so a very rough idea behind it
lets say initially
the total routing problem
they can be divided up into four sub
problems with respect to the regions on
the layout surface so this is similar to
partitioning so in this method
as if we are
ah using means partitioning and routing
in a hand in hand fire way
so one three two four then again one in
the next level
can be mapped to a block a
three can be mapped to two blocks d and
e two can be mapped to b and c and four
can be mapped to f
so this can be represented by a graph
like this for each of these nodes
represent individual routing problems
like for example
this b is a region containing many
blocks
you solve the routing problem here
solve the routing problem here combine
this b and c you have solved two
similarly you combine d and e you have
solved three in this way you go in a
hierarchical fashion and you can solve
the sub problems
so the top down approach
says
so
this is the cut tree which is called you
can cut it any places
so the leaves i am assuming is at level
h and the root is at level one
so you traverse the tree from top to
down level by level so it is like this
this is a top level view you go down you
get a more detailed view if you if you
want to further break this you go to a
more detail level this is top down
so
the problem instance at level i at every
stage you can solve using an integer
programming problem ok because they will
be
manageable and smaller in size
so without going into the detail
roughly these are this is the
stepwise procedure
that you
compute solution for the routing problem
i one
for
the trees starting from the root
two two h the leaf nodes
for all nodes at level i plus one you
compute the smaller sub problems
using
some method like integer programming
then combine all the solutions
so you do it for all the level by level
you go on doing this
simple
so conceptually this is simple
bottom up is the different
bottom up you are going from the
bottom to the top
that means the routing problem
associated with each branch of
the of the cut tree is solved then you
combine them to form a node at the
higher level then you move to the higher
level
but the problem is that
means as
compared to the previous approach top
down where you
started with a global view of the
problem you try to divide it up into
partitions and try to solve it but here
you are looking at the smaller sub
problems and try to combine them
together but you do not know what your
final routing problem look like
so you will get the global picture only
much later ok and its actually
so
so in practice what is done
some
mixture of top down and bottom up can be
used for handling large problems ok
so again
this is the algorithm for
bottom up
so for all nodes that
ah the bottom level you compute the
solutions by combining the solution of
the children nodes you go on repeating
this
from the leaf node
down to the
root node
bottom up fashion ok this is just the
conceptual steps
ok
now
in
ah this kind of hierarchical approaches
one thing i mentioned is that
at every stage you have a routing sub
problem
and you are trying to optimally solve it
using
some kind of integer linear program
you map it to an integer programming
problem and you use a integer
programming solver so many such solvers
are available
you can use it to get a good solution
and as i had said that you can use this
kind of solvers to get solution for
small to moderate size problems but not
for large problems because the time
complexity increases quite rapidly
so
the concurrent routing of the nets so
here what you are saying is that we are
not considering one net at a time
but we are considering several nets
together
now for this kind of a general routing
problem like see
i am just repeating
so when i am considering
a small problem instance
so that problem instance will not con
contain one net but maybe there are ten
nets
ten nets to be connected so i consider
this whole problem of connecting 10 nets
together
and use integer programming to get a
solution
but
but our other solutions which have
discussed earlier
they typically take one net at a time
and try to handle the routing problem
and solve it incrementally one at a time
but here we have one method
where we can
take a problem where multiple
nets the routing issue of them can be
handled in a concurrent fashion ok
so
global routing problem in this case
can be formulated as a zero one integer
programming problem zero one means the
variables take on
the value zero and one
and the solver tries to solve for all
the variables
now the idea is as follows the layout is
modeled as a grid graph
this we can possibly afford because our
sub problem is not very large
there are n number of vertices
which represent the grid cells
there are m number of edges
which indicate the adjacency between the
vertices
and the edge weights
as i mentioned earlier in the data
structures
represent
the capacity of the boundary ok
now let us see how integer linear
programming formulation can be done
so it is in fact its
it is quite straight forward
we do it in this way
suppose i have a net
i lets say let us take an example
suppose in a problem instance
so i have a net i where there are
several points
so now we look at several different ways
of connecting them
well
i am just showing
several alternatives so one way of
connecting them may be like this
this may be one possible connection
say another way of connecting may be
like this
say another way of connection may be
so for for for any net ni
there can be several alternatives
typically you know when you lay out the
wires you you just model them as means
steiner trees so you can say there can
be many steiner trees corresponding to
every net that you are going to lay out
this is something you have to evaluate
so here we are assuming
that for each net ni
there are
some ni possible steiner trees so there
are algorithms to approximately
determine the possible steiner trees for
nets
so you use one of those algorithms
and let this tiny trees be denoted by
t1i t2i up to
tni i
well
now out of these ni steiner trees you
will have to select one of them to route
the net ok for a particular net you have
to use only one way of connecting them
not more than one way ok
so this you specify like this
you use a variable x i j
where x i j will be 1
if net i
is routed using tree
t j i
and 0 for all other j values
so out of the possible n i values
or n i trees only one of them will be
having the value one
for all others
it means zero
this means that i am using the jth
steiner tree
for connecting net n
this is one and just to make sure
that i have selected this one for only
one j value for all others i have made
zero i also add a constraint that sigma
of x i j should be one
that means a single one
followed by
all other zero that means one steiner
tree should be selected for a net so we
can represent the constraint like this
ok
now
suppose the grid graph has m edges and
there are capital t trees for all the
nets
n i
is the number of trees for net i
so there are so many nets i am saying
that we want to
ah handle concurrently so sigma of ni
will be the set of steiner trees for all
the nets under consideration ok
so capital t will indicate the total
number of such trees
so the routing problem
we can define as follows
we define a matrix capital a which will
have dimension m
cross t
so m is the number of edges that many
rows
and number of trees as the column
and the coefficient will be one
if a edge
belongs to
a particular tree and zero otherwise
so this will tell you that which tree
is using which edges
so you appropriately set
the the entries of this this matrix to
one ok
and each
boundary arc
will be having a capacity c i
you ensure
that the capacity does not exceed c i
what i am doing
this a i p multiplied by x i mean x is
which
you recall x is
this matrix
which net you are using
so only for one of them it will be one
for rest there will be zeros
so you see total number of
edges that you are taking
that should not be crossing the capacity
ok
this is actually for all the nets
not for one for all the nets you see
that the total capacity of the
of the link i should not get crossed
and if each ti
you assign a cost
gij
then the objective function may be to
minimize the sum of the weighted cost
for all the trees
so this will be our overall integer
programming formulation
so which can be summarized as follows
minimize this objective function
subject to
this condition which says only one of
the
steiner trees for each net we are
choosing
this says
that for each boundary c i e each
boundary i
the number of nets crossing should not
exceed c i
and x k j these are all
binary values
so if you solve this problem you will
get values for the variables x i j
a i p and so on
this will be the output of the integer
programming i p solver i p solver will
give you the values of the variables
that minimizes the objective function
which is nothing but the solution that
you want
you will get the solution that for every
net
which standard you are selecting and for
each steiner tree which edges you are
using ok so the matrices a
and that x will give you that
information
so
this is just one thing that
that using integer programming you can
get the best solution for a routing sub
problems
if
provided the number of nets
and the
size of the nets is not very large
then you can use this to get an optimum
solution
of course there is another important
issue which will be
dealing with in detail later when we
talk about
performance driven issues like timing
and
delays
see with the advent of the deep cyber
micron technology as the devices or the
transistors are getting smaller and
smaller
the delay of the interconnection
is
starting to dominate
so earlier the gate delays were higher
the
the interconnection delays were less
smaller but now it is becoming the other
way around the interconnection delay is
becoming as important as the gates and
sometimes it is also dominating ok
so
this crosstalk noise issues we shall
also be handling this so increasing
proximity between the devices because of
the small sizes
and increased density
so
this has also resulted in increased in
crosstalk noise issues
so
modern day routers should also consider
the crosstalk noise
so we shall see later that we can
introduce buffers to reduce noise across
long segments
wire sizing some wires can be made more
wider
as compared to the others
and topology generation
is something that also which we shall be
looking at
so
with this we come to the end of this
lecture
now in the next lecture which you shall
be starting next week we shall be first
looking at
the
detailed routing sub problems and some
of the techniques which are used there
followed by
we shall be moving into the timing
related issues we shall be starting with
some discussions on clocking
and how we can route the clock nets and
so on after which we shall be going into
some other timing related issues like
static timing analysis crosstalks
etcetera
thank you